Directus - Google Calendar Sync (#18)
directus-community/guest-authoring: copy-this-template-directory/index.md

- For proper syncing, we need to have some ID that is shared between Directus item and Google Calendar event.
This will be the ID of Google event, saved as an additional field in Directus item. So, in Flows, there will be actions
to update this ID with the value from Google Apps Script, and also actions to search Directus items by this ID.
- it's not very straightforward to organize a stream of updates from Google Calendar.
```

![](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_gcalendar_shapes__23-10-22%2019.16.17.svg "detailed interactions scheme overview")

1 - Flow set to react on create/update events in our _collection1_. Another flow set to react on delete events. Both send a signal to our Google Apps Script webapp (2).

3 - The same webapp (but a different function) sends signals to another Directus Flow, that creates/updates/deletes items in collection1 accordingly (4).

5 - Google Calendar can send push notifications when an event is added/updated/deleted, those notifications can be received directly by Google Apps Script webapp, but webapp cannot read request headers, so proxy Directus Flow (6) is used to modify request and send to webapp with parameters in the body (7).

> 8 - Google Apps Script has additional functions (cron to renew notifications, function to stop notifications, etc)

Author: Ah, I see. I was trying to describe the processes in high-level interaction scheme. But it is inconsistent in placing of numbers - is it arrow (begin or end?) or block? I modified it to look more consistent now

&nbsp; 

**Let's dive in.**

&nbsp; 

## Setup on Directus side
Directus collection (_collection1_ in this sample project) has these fields:

`calendar_event_id` - type text, where Google calendar event id will be saved (automatically)

`calendar_event_start` - type timestamp, where the event start date is

`calendar_event_end` - type timestamp, where the event end date is

`name` - type text, where the event title is

`description` - type text, where event description is

> > `timestamp` type is available when the field is created in Advanced Mode. Could be Datetime type used instead? It might work, but since it doesn't have timezone info, you must ensure that your Directus and Google Calendar have the same timezone setting.

Author: I remember I saw something like this in guest-post docs, but I can only check the result in the GitHub md preview - and there it doesn't look working. But sure, if you suggesting it

After you save this Flow, copy the resulting webhook URL somewhere (the URL can be copied from the trigger node, when in view mode, not in edit mode).

***

&nbsp; 

### Flow "Send delete event to Google Calendar"

Processing of the Delete event is a bit different from processing of Create / Update (next flow). It should be set to blocking, cause we need to "intercept" the delete command and read item data - we need to know the id of the Google Calendar event, so we can send it to Published Google Apps Script.

![whole flow](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_2_full_.png "whole flow")

***

- Trigger node - Event Hook

![trigger node](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_2_01_.png "trigger node")

make sure that you have the same config:

Type - Filter(Blocking)

Scope - items.delete

Collections - a collection of your choice

Response - data of last operation

***

- Node 2 - "Read data"

![node 02](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_2_02_.png "node 02")

IDs edit raw value to:
```js
[
    "{{$trigger.payload[0]}}"
]
```
Query is empty

***

- Node 3 - "Webhook / Request URL"

![node 03](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_2_03_.png "node 03")

> URL is `{{$env.GCALENDARHOOKURL}}` - the actual value in the environment variable will be set after Google Apps Script is published.

Reviewer: We don't need to specify the value is coming later as we have already done that in this tutorial.

Method is Post

Request body:
```js
{
  "data": {{$last}},
  "action": "delete",
  "pass": "{{$env.GCALENDARHOOKSECRET}}"
}

```

> > note that {{$last}} is not quoted!

Reviewer: We also don't need to note the quoting as we did that in the last Flow

***

&nbsp; 
 

> ### Flow "Send create/update event to Google Calendar"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Send Create or Update Event to Google Calendar Flow"
```

> Processing of Create / Update is more complicated than Delete, cause after we send this event info, we might receive the ID of the Google Calendar Event that was created and we must update the current Directus item with this ID. This operation is not blocking. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Processing of Create / Update is more complicated than Delete. After we send the event information, we might receive the ID of the Google Calendar Event that was created and we must update the current Directus item with this ID. This operation is not blocking. 
```

Reviewer: Alternatively case -> because, info -> information. Make sure to write full words.

- Node 9 - "Webhook / Request URL"

![node 09](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_3_09.png "node 09")

key - **request_webhook_create**

URL is `{{$env.GCALENDARHOOKURL}}` - the actual value in the environment variable will be set after Google Apps Script is published.

Method is Post

Request body:
```js
{
  "data": {{$last}},
  "action": "create",
  "pass": "{{$env.GCALENDARHOOKSECRET}}"
}
```

> note that {{$last}} is not quoted!
  

***

- Node 10 - "Condition"
  
![node 10](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_3_10.png "node 10")

Rules:

```js
{
    "$last": {
        "data": {
            "res": {
                "_eq": "need_update_calendar_event_id"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

***

- Node 11 - "Update Data"

![node 11](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_3_11.png "node 11")

Collection - a collection of your choice

IDs (edit raw value):
```js
[
    "{{$trigger.key}}"
]
```

Payload:
```js
{
    "calendar_event_id": "{{request_webhook_create.data.id}}"
}
```

> Make sure that you are using the same key (here it's "request_webhook_create") as you set in node 9

Query is empty

***

&nbsp; 

### Flow "Process events from Google Calendar"

> This is a webhook, called from Google Apps script when an event is created / updated / deleted in Google Calendar.
> 
> Collection1 item will be Created / Updated / Deleted from incoming hook parameters.
> 
> This flow is a bit wide, so the screenshot is split in two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This final Flow is the entry point for the Google Apps Script to interact with Directus regardless of whether it is triggered based on a create, update, or delete operation. It will determine and execute the correct operations within your collection.
```

part 1

![whole flow](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_full_1_.png "whole flow")

part 2

![whole flow](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_full_2_.png "whole flow")

***

- Trigger Node - Webhook

![trigger node](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_01.png "trigger node")

config:

Method - Post

Response Body - Data of Last Operation

***

- Node 2 - "Condition"
  

> simple gatekeeper - check that the password from the incoming parameter is the same as saved in the Environment Variable

Reviewer: When writing technical content, we try and stay away from the word simple. https://justsimply.dev/

![node 05](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_05.png "node 05")

Key - **item_read**

Permisssions - Full Access 

Collection - a collection of your choice

IDs is empty

Query:
```js
{
    "filter": {
        "calendar_event_id": {
            "_eq": "{{$trigger.body.data.calendar_event_id}}"
        }
    }
}
```

***

- Node 6 - "Condition"

if such an item is found (then proceed to actions delete/update, otherwise - create a new item (for update action))

![node 06](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_06.png "node 06")

Rules:
```js
{
    "count($last)": {
        "_gte": 1
    }
}
```

***

- Node 7 - "Condition"

determine from the incoming parameter, if a Directus item needs to be deleted

![node 07](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_07.png "node 07")

Rules:
```js
{
    "$trigger": {
        "body": {
            "action": {
                "_eq": "delete"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

***

- Node 8 - "Delete Data"

![node 08](/copy-this-template-directory/directus_flow_4_08.png "node 08")

Permisssions - Full Access 

Collection - a collection of your choice

IDs (edit raw value):
```js
[
    "{{item_read[0].id}}"
]
```

> > Make sure that you are using the same key (here it's "item_read") as you set in node 5

Reviewer: Info box

if there was an error during operation. This node is not necessary

After you save this Flow, copy the resulting webhook URL somewhere.

***

&nbsp; 

## Setup in Google side

[Google Apps Script](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/overview) is usually enabled by default, but if you are using Google Workspace within the organization, your Admin might disable Google Apps Script.

Google Apps Script can be created as a dedicated file (Drive → New → More → Google Apps Script).

But for this project, we will use Script within Spreadsheet. That way it is easier to use a spreadsheet for config and for logging.

For quicker setup, please use [this spreadsheet template copy](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1mXuSVR01uueeRDTjNeSXFH2rAziWkXdrNb2Jym413Fw/copy), it has full script inside and sheet with config.

In your spreadsheet copy, open the menu Extensions → Apps Script. It will open Script Editor.

![GAS 04](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_04.png "GAS 04")

Click the button `Deploy` → `New Deployment`.

When Google Apps Script is deployed as Web App, it creates a unique URL like `https://script.google.com/macros/s/xxxx/exec`.

> When this URL is called with a GET request, the script function `doGet` is executed.  When this URL is called with a POST request, script function `doPost` is executed. We will use POST requests and doPost function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this URL is called with a GET request, the script function `doGet` is executed.  When this URL is called with a POST request, script function `doPost` is executed. We will use POST requests and `doPost` function.
```

 
 ***

![GAS 05](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_05.png "GAS 05")

set type to web app. Description - anything. Execute as - Me. Who has access - anyone.
Click `Deploy`.

> 

Reviewer: Write as prose - right now it's just a bunch of tiny points. Drop the image - I don't think the illustration is needed here.

 ***

![GAS 01](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_01.png "GAS 01")

 click `Authorize access`
 ***

![GAS 02](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_02.png "GAS 02")

 
Choose your account and then click "Allow".

Some users (usually, users not within the organization) will see a scary-looking

"Google hasn’t verified this app
The app is requesting access to sensitive info in your Google Account. Until the developer (your email) verifies this app with Google, you shouldn't use it."

Click "Advanced"

Then click "Go to code (unsafe)"

 
 ***

![GAS 03](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_03.png "GAS 03")

click "Allow".

If all is fine, you'll see next popup with URL of your published web app.

Web app

URL

`https://script.google.com/macros/s/xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx/exec`

Copy

click `copy` to get this Web app URL (make sure that you are copying web app URL and not Library URL) and update Directus Environment Variable `GCALENDARHOOKURL` to this value

 ***

>  Back to the script editor

Reviewer: All of this can be summarized in a sentence. I don't think, in development, we need to go into explaining that it's a non-verified application. Something like: 

Authorize the app with your Google account, and you will be given a URL of your published web application. Copy it and update your Directus `GCALENDARHOOKURL` variable.

Return to the Script Editor.

Author: Yes, I understand your point. On the other hand, most of the people that will be trying it, didn't work with Google Apps Script, they will be confused by "Google hasn't verified this app" and will certainly click default button "back to safety", that will stop the process.

> ![GAS 06](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_06.png "GAS 06")

Reviewer: Another example of why alt text is super important. 'In the action bar at the top of the script editor there is a run button and a dropdown of function names'

> as shown by the arrow `1`, select function `listCalendars`. Click Run (as shown by the arrow `2`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the `listCalendars` function.
```

Through the illistration and improved alt text, you don't need to go overly in-depth here. It's clear that there's a dropdown to select functions and a run button.

> you'll see the result of the function listCalendars run. Copy the ID of the calendar that you want to track. Usually, it's the same as an account email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of the function `listCalendars` will be shown. Copy the ID of the calendar that you want to track. Usually, it's the same as an account email.
```

&nbsp; 

### Update Spreadsheet Config

In your Spreadsheet go to the 'Config' sheet.

> set `calendar_id` to the id of your calendar.
> 
> set `directus_url_proxy` to the URL of Flow "Google Calendar event Proxy"
> 
> set `directus_url_webhook_from_g` to the URL of Flow "Process events from Google Calendar"
> 
> set `pass` to the same value as in Directus Environment Variable `GCALENDARHOOKSECRET`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. set `calendar_id` to the id of your calendar.
2. set `directus_url_proxy` to the URL of Flow "Google Calendar event Proxy"
3. set `directus_url_webhook_from_g` to the URL of Flow "Process events from Google Calendar"
4. set `pass` to the same value as in Directus Environment Variable `GCALENDARHOOKSECRET`
```

Make sure to update the flow names based on this review.

&nbsp; 

> ### Google Apps Script 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### One-Time Set Up Of Google Apps Script 
```

> Back to the script editor. We need to run manually couple of functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Script Editor, we must manually run a few functions once during setup.
```

> select function `triggerResubscribeOnceWeek` (just like you selected listCalendars earlier). Click `Run`.
> 
> If the run was successful, in the `config` sheet values next to `channel_id`, `resource_id` will be filled.
> 
> select function `runManual_getSyncedEvents`. Click `Run`.
> 
> If the run was successful, in the `config` sheet value next to `sync_token`, `resource_id` will be filled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select `triggerResubscribeOnceWeek` from the functions dropdown and click **Run**. If the run was successful, in the `config` sheet values next to `channel_id`, `resource_id` will be filled.

Select `runManual_getSyncedEvents` from the functions dropdown and click **Run**. If the run was successful, in the `config` sheet value next to `sync_token`, `resource_id` will be filled.
```

> > For most of the Google Workspace App, Apps Script has a specific library, like `CalendarApp` with easy-to-use functions. However, these functions don't have all the functionality available for API calls. Luckily it's possible to use Advanced Calendar Service - it's almost like calling API calls directly. Thanks to that we can subscribe to notifications and retrieve a list of new events using syncToken.

Reviewer: No need for this to be in a quote. I also ask why we need this information to complete or understand this post. The sentence below does enough to explain what is needed.

Author: I thought it's not a quote, but rather a sidenote. This Information probably needs addition for complete understanding: "In the template script copy this service is already enabled. But if you want to create script from scratch, you need to enable it. 'Services' menu on the left panel, click + and choose Google Calendar."

> The calendar events push notifications need resubscription, its maximum time before expiration is 1 week.

Reviewer: We must set up a weekly Trigger to resubscribe.

***

Set Time Trigger

![GAS 09](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_09.png "GAS 09")

Click `Triggers`, then `Add Trigger`

***

![GAS 10](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_10.png "GAS 10")

Select function triggerResubscribeOnceWeek

Deployment - Head

Select event source - Time-driven

Select type - Week Timer

Select day of week and time - your choice

Failure notifications - Notify me immediately

Click `Save`

&nbsp; 

### Script source code - list of functions

> The source code of the script is organized into several functions (but there is a lot of space for refactoring and improvements)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code of the script is organized into several functions. In this section, I will define what each does so you can explore and expand it. 
```

`writelog` - utility function to write to the spreadsheet log entry

`listCalendars` - function for manual launch - to list available for user calendars info (IDs, description)

`triggerResubscribeOnceWeek` - function for once-a-week time trigger. Will resubscribe to calendar push notifications (1 week is the maximum allowed time)

`runManual_processSyncedEvents` - function for manual launch - get events stream and process it (send to Directus)

`runManual_getSyncedEvents` - function for manual launch - set initial sync token, nothing sent to Directus

`getConfig` - utility function for retrieving Config set in spreadsheet

`updateConfig` - utility function for updating certain Config in the spreadsheet

`callDirectusWebhook` - actual data sent to Directus

`processSyncedEvents` - get events stream and process it (send to Directus)

`doPost` - main function, special name doPost means that when the web app is published, POST requests are processed here

`callCalendarEventsWatch_stop` - utility function for stopping push notifications

`callCalendarEventsWatch` - utility function for registering URL for receiving push notifications

> `getSyncedEvents` - utility function for getting a list of new / updated / deleted events in Google Calendar, using special "syncToken"

Reviewer: Format as a ul

&nbsp; 

#### Script update deployment

> The deployed web app has versions, so if you update doPost function (or something called from it) and want these changes to have an effect - a new version of the web app needs to be deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deployed web app has versions, so if you update the `doPost` function (or something called from it) and want these changes to have an effect - a new version of the web app needs to be deployed. If you create a new version in the same deployment, the URL will stay the same. 
```

Reviewer: This is important upfront because I was wondering while reading.

![GAS 07](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_07.png "GAS 07")

Manage Deployments → `Edit` (pencil icon button)

![GAS 08](/copy-this-template-directory/GAS_08.png "GAS 08")

Choose `New version`, then click `Deploy`.

> The URL of the web app should stay the same (if you updated the current deployment and didn't create new deployment)

Reviewer: Remove this as it's being moved above.

***

&nbsp; 

### Ready to roll

I hope you are not exhausted after reading this post and repeating all the actions required for this project to run.

Everything is set to fully automatic two-way sync. You can try it by adding items in Directus and adding events in the Calendar.

You can check logs in the log panel for each of  Directus Flows. And you can check spreadsheet `log` sheet.

> Feel free to send me a message if you know how to improve this project.

Reviewer: Actually write a summary here which outlines again the steps we took at a high-level.
